hello math fans the winning question
this week is how can you show
geometrically that pi is greater than 3
and less than 4 now I absolutely love
this question because this is exactly
the kind of maths that the ancient
civilizations used to be fascinated with
because they didn't have calculators or
computers or accurate measuring
instruments they had to use geometry and
approximations for numbers such as pi
and in this instance it actually dates
back to 250 BC the first known
approximation of pi and the ancient
Greek philosopher and mathematician
Archimedes and what Archimedes did was
use a method called polygon
approximation to calculate a lower bound
for pi and an upper bound for pi and
we're actually going to use the exact
same method here to show geometrically
that pi lies between 3 & 4 because of
you're talking about the number pi we
are of course going to start by drawing
a circle and this is because pi and
circles go hand-in-hand they are one in
the same thing almost and this is
because the number pi actually pops up
as a universal constant when you think
about any circle and take a particular
ratio of two let's and those two
distances are the diameter which is the
distance across the circle passing
through the center and the circumference
which is the distance all the way around
the edge of the circle if you take the
ratio of these two lengths and you do
the circumference C divided by the
diameter D you will get a number and for
any circle this is always equal to about
3.14 and this of course is pi now that
we have this relationship circumference
divided by the diameter equals park what
we can do is pick a particular size of
circle to help us with our geometrical
calculation and what we actually want to
pick it is for the diameter of our
circle
to be exactly what because substituting
this into our ratio our formula over
here this tells us that the
circumference C is exactly pi so the
distance all the way around the edge of
our circle here is exactly pi so now if
we draw a shape on the outside with a
larger perimeter and then a shape on the
inside with a smaller perimeter we will
get an upper and a lower bound on pi the
conditions that are chosen shapes to go
on the outside and the inside of our
circle must satisfy our that these
shapes must be what are called regular
polygons and this is why the method is
called the polygon approximation method
and a regular polygon is a shape where
every side is of equal length and every
angle is also equal to understand why
choosing regular polygons means that we
get a perimeter greater than that of the
circle for our outside shape and smaller
than that of the circle for the inside
shape we have to consider what is called
the triangle law super super important
when you come to study max at university
basically what this law states is that
to go between two points a and B the
shortest path between them is just the
straight line joining those two pipes so
there is a straight line you could have
taken a curved line you could have gone
via this Third Point C and then gone to
B but you can see hopefully if I just
looking at the board or if we got out a
rule or a measure these distances you
would see that the shortest path between
the two points is a straight line from A
to B if we now take our new knowledge of
the triangle law and apply it to say two
points on our circle then the shortest
distance between these two points will
be a straight line joining them like
this
and if we also want to have a shape on
the outside or some way of joining the
two points outside of our circle because
we cannot enter into the circle there
must be some Third Point which we pass
through and so you can see here that the
shortest distance between these two
points is a straight line which is
inside the circle you then have the
circle itself which is a slightly larger
distance between the two points and then
finally you have this third path which
passes through a third point which again
is even greater than the curved line of
the circle and so applying this to every
corner of the shape or the polygon that
we draw on the outside and the inside of
our circle we can see that the one on
the inside must have a perimeter less
than the circumference of our circle and
the shape on the outside must have a
perimeter larger than the circumference
of our circle and so all that's left to
decide is which shapes to draw in order
to get the lower bound of three that
we're looking for and the upper bound on
the outside of four let's start with the
outside shape so we want our upper bound
to be four so we want a regular polygon
that encloses our circle with a
perimeter the distance around the edge
of that shape to be equal to four so
let's start by considering the diameter
of our circle because this can help us
we know that the distance from one side
of the circle to the other passing
through the center is equal to one so
now if we shift this line up to the top
of our circle it will still have
distance equal to one so if we move this
line up we get a line across the top
which has length one and so if we
continue this now and complete it to
make a square we have that each side is
of length one and you can see that it's
touching at each point at the bottom
that's our
the left and the right of the circle it
has to touch because these lines have to
be equal to one because the diameter
here is 1 and so each one of these sides
of our square has length 1 and the total
perimeter therefore is 4 which is
exactly what we wanted moving on to the
inside shape now this one is a little
trickier because we don't have an
obvious distance like we did with the
diameter being 1 in terms of drawing our
shape but the square worked pretty well
on getting the bound on the outside our
upper bound of 4 so let's start off by
trying a square and see where we get
maybe it's good maybe it's bad we can
try it out using a square as our inside
shape we found a lower bound a 2.84
she's not quite the three that we were
hoping for to increase our lower bound
and reach the golden number of three
that were aiming for we need to pick a
shape with a larger perimeter so we've
tried a square which has four sides so
you might think the next best option
would be a pentagon a five sided shape
the Pentagon's are quite difficult to
deal with six-sided shape a hexagon is
actually a bit easier during our hexagon
inside the circle we're going to then
divide it up into six identical
equilateral triangles and then use our
knowledge about triangles and again the
diameter being want to help us work out
the perimeter of the hexagon so to
divide it up we start at the center and
then we add in these lines so you'll
notice here that this is a line from the
center of the circle to a point on the
edge of the circle and this is half of
the diameter or what is known as the
radius of the circle so each one of
these lines has length 1/2 so we can
write all of these in and now that we
know that each one of these triangles is
an equilateral triangle these ones
around the edge must also be of leg
one half so we have six equilateral
triangles where every side is of length
1/2 and most importantly for us it has
one perimeter calculation we can just
count up the length of each of these
edges of each triangle so we have 1/2
plus 1/2 as 1/2 as 1/2 plus 1/2 times 6
lots of 1/2 equals 3 we've done it we've
got our limits that we were hoping to
get so we can remove the 2.84 and we can
write our much more accurate measurement
using a hexagon instead of a square that
our lower bound of pi is 3 and there you
have it we have shown that the lower
bound of pi is 300 pound of pi is for
purely via a geometrical argument using
the same polygon approximation method
that we've just done with a square and a
hexagon Archimedes was actually able to
get an incredibly accurate set of bounds
on pad and he did this by drawing a 96
sided polygon on the outside of his
circle and in a 96 sided polygon on the
inside of the circle and then he could
use quite ingenious methods to work out
the length the perimeter of each of
those two 96 itd polygons and the
bounds that he found were that pi is
less than 22 divided by 7 and pi is
greater than 223 divided by 17 what and
in terms of decimals
this actually tells you that pi is
greater than 3 point 1 4 1 and less than
3 point 1 4 3 and the actual true value
of pi here is about 3.14 to so it lies
bang in the middle of these two bounds
that our communities was able to put on
this number
using this method in 250 b.c and we've
just used the exact same method that he
would have done just with a slightly
simpler case to get our lower bound of 3
and our upper bound of 4 so not quite as
accurate as the great man himself but
not a bad start
so that just
me to say thank you to everybody for
watching I hope you've enjoyed it and
most importantly I hope that I've
answered the question as always please
do keep sending me your questions and
remember to pick your favorites in the
next vote also make sure you subscribe
to my channel and be sure to check out
my website tom rocks maths calm and to
follow me on facebook twitter instagram
at tom rocks Matt's back next time with
the answer to another one of your
questions